Translator: Sigal Tifferet
Reviewer: Ivana Korom
Hi there.
I could be wrong, but I think
this talk may have the distinction
of being the one talk in this series
that ends with orgasm.
(Laughter)
But let's not get ahead of ourselves.
Have you ever thought about the fact
that you're here, alive on this planet
because every one
of your ancestors reproduced?
Every one, in an unbroken chain,
all the way back
to the first life on this planet,
over three and a half billion years ago.
That's a lot of reproducing.
And for the past billion years,
your ancestors reproduced sexually.
So sex is a pretty big deal.
But you probably knew that.
But let's talk about human mating.
Why does human mating
take the forms that it does?
Why are we attracted to certain people?
Why do we sometimes
form long-term romantic relationships?
Why do we sometimes cheat?
Now I don't mean
why consciously do we do these things.
I don't mean
what happens in the brain to cause it.
I mean, why did we evolve these feelings
and these behaviors?
In other words,
how did the underlying brain structures
and brain chemistry contribute
to our ancestors' reproductive success
so that those traits got passed on
into the present generation
while others didn't.
Answering evolutionary questions like this
is like being a crime scene investigator,
we're left with the evidence,
and we have to try to establish
what happened.
So let's go back
six or seven million years ago
to our early ancestors.
This is right after
the split between our lineage
and the lineage that would eventually
give rise to chimpanzees.
Now these were small brained apes,
they walked on two legs,
and males probably fought each other
for mating opportunities.
We know this because males
fight for mates in all
of our closest living relatives,
chimpanzees, orangutans, gorillas.
And because males are larger than females
when they fight for mates.
And the fossil record indicates
that our male ancestors
were larger than females.
So males tend to be larger,
more muscular, stronger,
more physically aggressive,
when they fight for mates.
Our species has all the hallmarks
of a species that's experienced
an evolutionary history
of male fighting for mates.
For example, men have, on average,
60 percent more muscle mass,
and 75 percent more
upper body muscle mass,
and those differences in musculature
translate into large sex differences
in strength.
The average man is stronger
than 99.9% of women.
These are data on hand strength,
which is a good predictor
of overall upper body strength,
on over 600 men and women.
And as you can see,
there's a large sex difference.
And in fact, not one
of almost 400 women had as strong
of a hand strength as the average man.
So, men can open jars.
(Laughter)
And move furniture or at least two things
that we're good for.
Who cares, right?
The answer is that men care.
Men, especially young men,
seem really concerned
about figuring out
who's the toughest or strongest,
or the most physically formidable,
and sometimes they devise elaborate ways
for determining this.
From early development,
boys and men are more
physically aggressive than girls and women
all over the world,
and this aggression
sometimes results in violence.
Men have a virtual monopoly
on same-sex homicides.
In other words, men are vastly more likely
to kill each other
than women are to kill each other.
These are data from every society
from every time period in history
for which data were available
when the authors compiled them,
on proportion of same-sex homicides
that are male killing male.
And as you can see,
the percentage is always close to 100%.
On average, 95%
of same-sex homicides are committed
by males, and importantly,
these don't include war killings,
which would bring the percentages
even closer to 100%.
And from what evidence that we have,
a dominance among men translates into
mating and reproductive opportunities.
So we're a species that's experienced
an evolutionary history
in which our male ancestors
won mating opportunities
through the use or threat of force.
In that regard, our apple
has not fallen far
from the evolutionary tree.
But in other ways, human mating
and reproduction
are profoundly different
from what we see in our close relatives,
and they've changed a lot
since our early ancestors.
For example, males in chimpanzees,
orangutans and gorillas,
spend time and effort competing for mates,
but don't spend much time
with individual females
and don't provide resources.
They don't provide food
for their offspring.
So that's a big change.
Although most human societies
allow polygamous marriage,
that is one man married
to more than one woman,
even within polygamous societies,
most marriages are monogamous.
And in the average
hunter-gatherer society,
almost 80% of married women
are monogamous,
so that's different.
And, importantly, men provide resources
for their mates and offspring.
So how did we get there?
Well, in species where males
fight each other for mates,
dominant males indicated by the larger,
darker male symbols here,
tend to have more mating opportunities,
and hence more offspring.
And subordinate males
tend to have fewer mating opportunities
and are more likely to fail to reproduce.
So this sets up an interesting situation,
because for subordinate males,
it would be advantageous
to attempt monogamy
rather than winning
lots of mating opportunities.
One mate is better than none.
The problem is that in general,
subordinate males cannot defend females
from dominant males,
and besides, females tend to prefer mating
with dominant males
for the genetic benefits,
producing stronger, healthier offspring.
So what changed all of this
was probably several transitions
happening together around the same time.
By about two and a half million years ago,
we had started to incorporate
more meat into our diet.
We know this from various
lines of evidence,
including - this is cool - stone tool
cut marks on animal bones
dated to 2.5 million years ago.
That's cool. I love this stuff!
And then by about 2 million years ago,
brain size really started to increase,
and with that came a lengthening
of the juvenile period,
so now kids became both
really costly and costly
for a long period of time.
And this made male provisioning
both possible and necessary.
Possible because it's much easier
to bring back calories,
protein, fats, in the form of meat
than trying to do that
by transporting plant foods,
and necessary because kids became
so energetically costly
that individual females
would have had trouble providing
resources for themselves
and their offspring.
And when we look
at modern hunter-gatherer societies,
that's what we see.
These are aggregate data
across several hunter-gatherer societies
on net daily calories.
Are you bringing in more calories
than you consume,
or are you consuming
more than you bring in?
And the green bars
are net daily caloric surplus,
in other words, bringing in
more than you consume.
And the red bars are a deficit,
so you're consuming more
than you bring in.
And you'll notice that men
from about 20 years of age
to 60 years of age are operating
at a daily caloric surplus.
They bring in,
generally through hunting,
more calories than they can consume,
and these calories are distributed.
If it's large game,
it's generally distributed
equally to everybody
in the village or camp.
Smaller items can be brought back
to individual family,
but this contrasts with what's going on
with women, in their reproductive years,
they're operating
at a daily caloric deficit.
Gestation, lactation, carrying babies,
are extremely costly energetically
and limit one's ability
to forage efficiently.
So male provisioning,
both possible through hunting,
and necessary.
And this change had profound impacts
on human mating and reproduction.
In a sense,
it tipped the balance for females.
So now it was sometimes worth mating
with a subordinate male,
even if he may not possess the best genes,
if he provided resources.
And this is baboon pornography.
(Laughter)
I probably should have warned you
there'd be monkey porn.
This is from PlayBaboon Magazine.
Alright, I'm going to stop with the jokes.
This is a female baboon in estrus,
so her genitals are swollen,
and this happens
in a lot of primate species.
Females' appearance
changes over the cycle,
and becomes more attractive
and this incites male competition
for females
during the fertile part of the cycle,
with dominant males tending
to monopolize copulations,
closer to ovulation.
Well. We don't look like this.
And you knew that.
But what you might not know
is that women's attractiveness
does change over the cycle.
My lab, and others, have shown
that women's faces, voices, even odors,
are more attractive to men
during the fertile part of the cycle.
But these changes are extremely subtle.
And compared to other primates,
the evidence indicates that we've evolved
to suppress cues to ovulation.
That in a sense,
ovulation is concealed in humans.
But think about what impact
this would have.
This would mean that dominant males
would not be able to monopolize
copulations near ovulation.
It would protect the pair bond
from invasion by a dominant male.
So that a male in a pair
would have more confidence
that he was the father of the offspring.
The couple is having sex
throughout the cycle.
And this is unique to human mating,
we don't see it in many other primates.
We have sex throughout the cycle.
And so this would essentially
increase a male's confidence
in paternity, because a dominant
or some other male
wouldn't be able to target the female
and bully their way in
at the fertile point in the cycle.
And this would have important implications
for parental investment,
in particular, males providing resources
for their offspring.
Because across species,
when males provide resources
for offspring,
they target those resources
toward their own biological offspring,
and they avoid investing
in the offspring of unrelated males.
And so the evolution
of male care for offspring
and investing in resources and offspring,
pair bonding, and concealed ovulation,
went very much hand-in-hand
over our evolution.
We have also evolved
a specialized psychology
for forming long-term
romantic relationships
with the possibility of investing
in offspring together.
We fall in love.
All around the world,
people prefer mates who are kind
and generous and capable
and willing to care
for mates and offspring.
In one of the largest
cross-cultural studies
of human mate preferences ever conducted,
covering 33 countries shown in red here,
the single most important mate choice
criterion to both men and women,
was mutual love and attraction.
But as you also know,
people are not always
perfectly faithful to their mates.
And in particular,
women sometimes face a tradeoff
between good genes and investment.
Women sometimes find themselves
in relationships with men
who may be caring providers,
but may not possess
the best quality genes for offspring
making them strong and healthy.
And several features
of women's mating psychology
seem to have evolved, in part,
to resolve this trade off.
And I mean, recruiting genes,
if you will,
from outside of the long-term
relationship.
For example,
women have more sexual fantasies
about men other
than their long-term partner,
during the fertile part of the cycle,
and that's particularly true
if the long-term partner
has physical signs
of being lower in genetic quality,
like he's less physically attractive.
I think that's interesting.
(Laughter)
That's why I'm talking about it,
I hope you do too.
And women's mate preferences
similarly change over the cycle
so that they prefer more dominant,
more masculine males
during the fertile part of the cycle.
These are results of a study
that I conducted
on women's preferences for men's voices.
And I used computer software
to manipulate recordings of men's voices
to make them sound
either more masculine
or more dominant,
or more subordinate, more feminine.
And I had women rate them
on how attractive would this man be
for a short-term,
purely sexual relationship,
and for a long-term
committed relationship?
And I also got information
about where women were in their cycles.
Were they in the fertile
or non-fertile part of the cycle?
These were all women
not taking hormonal contraception.
And what I found was that
women preferred a more masculine,
dominant-sounding voice, specifically
in the fertile point of the cycle,
and only for a sexual relationship
versus a long-term committed relationship.
Now, this sounds like science fiction,
but it's science, fact.
Because this result has been shown
lots of times
across a variety of domains from
women's preferences for men's voices,
that this result was replicated
by another lab.
Women's preferences
for men's faces, bodies,
odors, and even behavior.
Well, I said that we would get to orgasm.
(Laughter)
And we're there.
I just want to start by saying I'm for it.
(Laughter)
I'm pro-orgasm.
I think more people
should have more orgasms.
But from a scientific perspective,
women's orgasm is especially fascinating
because there's evidence indicating
that it increases the probability
that conception will result
from an act of sex.
There's evidence that it brings sperm
up through the female reproductive tract
and toward the egg.
And think about what
the implications here could be.
If women were more likely
to have orgasms with some men than others,
then this could be a mechanism
by which they choose, not consciously,
to be fertilized
by some males and not others.
And wouldn't you predict
that women would be more likely
to have orgasms with males
of high genetic quality?
And in fact, a study by my lab published
just a couple of years ago
found that women reported more orgasms,
earlier timed orgasms, that is,
they were easier to achieve,
they achieved them more quickly,
when they were having sex
when their mate was more masculine
and more dominant,
and what's interesting
is that this was true only
for their orgasms from sexual intercourse,
but not from other
partnered sexual behaviors.
I'll let you use your imagination
what those might be.
So we've seen that thinking
like an evolutionist
can enable us to predict things
about ourselves
that we did not already know,
and would not likely have guessed
for a long time.
We didn't know
that women's mate preferences changed
over the cycle.
Until evolutionary thinking
led us to that discovery.
So that's one point that I want to make.
But we've also seen
how evolutionary thinking can clarify
and unite diverse parts
of the human experience,
and help us understand
the best and the worst of ourselves,
from violence and aggression
and infidelity
to men's care for their children,
sexual attraction, sexual pleasure,
and even the strength
and fragility of romantic love.
Thank you.
(Applause)